---
date: 2021-03-06 12:00
description: In introduction to creating a website using Publish created by John Sundell
tags: publish
---

# Creating a website using [Publish](https://github.com/JohnSundell/Publish)

I've wanted to make a website for a while. I had a previous one that was build using [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com), which worked well enough. The main issues I had was that I didn't use it enough for me remember how to use it, and since it was using a language also rarely use, It made things more difficult incase I wanted to customize it some more.

When I found a bit of time to update my website, and possibly start blogging, I decided to try out [Publish](https://github.com/JohnSundell/Publish), mainly because it's written in Swift and uses Swift Package Manager. Ideally that means that when I inevitably procrastinate updating my website again, I'll already know the language and related dependency management, so it'll be easer to get back into creating content. 

## What is Publish?

The simplest version is that Publish is a static site generator. It takes some folders with markdown or html plus a little swift code that defines the structure of your website, and creates a folder that contains all the generated html and resources for your website. You can then take this folder and use any number of web hosing options to make it available online (I'm using [Github Pages](https://pages.github.com)).

There are two pieces to Publish, though both use the same name so it can get a little confusing. 

First of all there's the Publish command line tool. It has a couple commands that can can simplify creating, generating, and deploying your website. But the command I've found the most useful is for running a local server for the website so you can easily see what it will look like without deploying to another server.    

Secondly there's the Publish Swift Package. It provides all the types to use to define your website, as well as the methods to generate it. It also provided a number of ways you can customize your website, from using a custom theme to adding your own plugins that are run as part of generating your website. Since it's all written in, you can also add any other steps to the process as well. 

## Getting started the automatic way

The first steps would be to install the Publish command line tool, which can be installed using Homebrew with the following command.

```bash
brew install publish
```

Next you'll need to create a Swift Package for your website. Running the command `publish new` will automatically create and setup a new package in an empty folder. The following commands will make a new folder and create the package in there. Feel free to change `MyWebsite` to whatever name you'd like. 

```bash
mkdir MyWebsite
cd MyWebsite
publish new
```

That should setup everything needed to run the website. You can take a look at it by running

```bash
publish run
```

The you can open the website in your browser when you see the following line

```bash
🌍 Starting web server at http://localhost:8000
```
